posts/the-tradeoff-trap: init (#17)
NotAShelf/notashelf.dev: apps/notashelf.dev/posts/the-tradeoff-trap.md

---
title: "The Tradeoff Trap"
description: "When Simplicity Feels Like Surrender"
date: 2025-08-11
keywords: ["thoughts", "software", "programming"]
---

> Not so long ago, I have spent quite a bit of time writing a new component for my

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not so long ago, I spent quite a bit of time writing a new component for my
```

site. It is not really _that_ fancy. Though suffice it to say, it took more time
than it was worth; the component is written in Rust, compiled to WASM using
`wasm-pack` and it's shoehorned into my Astro stack through a Vite plugin that I
_probably_ regret adding to my site. It does work, technically, but it's not
too clean. It's not even clever. It just... feels heavy. [^1]

[^1]: And the performance benefits aren't even that great! What happened to my
    blazingly fast, memory-safe Rust?

> Truth be told, I did enjoy the experiment. I have been long fascinated by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Truth be told, I did enjoy the experiment. I have long been fascinated by the
```

The itch comes when I write code that is too simple. You probably do too. It's
that little voice that says: you could be more clever than this. You could
abstract this. You could invent something novel. It’s not about what the code
needs. It’s about what you need: a little shot of novelty, a way to prove that
you still know how to do something slightly absurd. And sure, I tell myself it's
for maintainers. Future contributors. Elegance.

But the truth? I do it for myself. For the thrill of wrapping a problem in
something unnecessarily beautiful. To prove that I can.

## The Joy Tax

Truth be told, joy matters. It drives creativity. It is also why I still spend
time programming. However, it comes with a tax. Joy tells you that
layering three patterns on top of each other is fine because you will _totally_
clean it up later. Joy tells you that you are learning. Sometimes that's true.
But more often, it leaves behind a breadcrumb trail of entropy. Small
complications that add up over time until you're afraid to touch anything
without a full test suite and a stiff drink.

Simplicity, on the other hand, has a kind of power I have a hard time

> describing. If I were to try and visualise it for you, I'd tell you of a puzzle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
describing. If I were to try to visualise it for you, I'd tell you of a puzzle
```
Also, you use the British spelling for visualise here, although elsewhere you utilise American spellings. Perhaps change it to visualize

Author: Do you perhaps belive that I respect either dialect?

I use whichever sounds better to me :trollface:

piece falling into place on the first try. Just in.

Consider this. A loop. A few conditionals. No clever tricks. No helper macros
that magically know what context you're in. Just boring code. And I mean that in
the best way. Boring code runs fast. It fits in your head. It does not surprise

> you six months later.It might look uninspired but it has its own power.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you six months later. It might look uninspired but it has its own power.
```

Simplicity means you can revisit it months later and feel like you understand it
immediately. It means fewer bugs and fewer performance surprises. A plain
solution usually uses less memory and runs faster without requiring a profiler.

Yet there is this intriguing feeling that accompanies simplicity. It feels
almost like surrender. It feels like admitting the challenge was too difficult
Maybe we fear judgement for writing something that looks
pedestrian. We call it _boring_ code instead of reliable code. We convince
ourselves that plain means uninspired when in reality it often means practical
and predictable.

## A Fork in the Road

Projects used to come in two broad flavors. At least there are two that are

> relevant to us today, but the new third variant is more sinister. Tradditionally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relevant to us today, but the new third variant is more sinister. Traditionally
```

choosing one tool.

Sometimes the best path forward is plain. Your code will not sparkle, but it
might just hum along quietly without any unpleasant surprises. Alternatively,
the best path forward might just be _intricate_. Your code may creak under
pressure but it will teach you things you could never learn with a toy example.
Neither choice diminishes you as a coder. Both are valid expressions of craft.

So the next time you stand at that crossroads, pause before you reach for the
clever trick. Ask yourself what you truly need from this project. Do you need
speed or delight in playing with language features? Do you need rock solid
uptime or rapid feedback on a research question? Answer that and choose
deliberately. Honor the tradeoff. There is no perfect solution, only the right
compromise for now. When you are racing against a deadline, choose simplicity and
accept the dullness. When you are prototyping a radical idea, choose
sophistication and accept the technical debt. When you are building something
meant to last, choose the combination that yields reliability, even if it does not
inspire a standing ovation from your future self.

> And remember: simplicity or sophistication, they are not sole measures of your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And remember: neither simplicity or sophistication are the sole measures of your
```
